CS2400: Assignment 1
Srinidhi Prabhu, CS14B028
In this assignment, we generate and sample two sinusoidal sig-
nals, and observe their properties in the frequency domain using
the Discrete Fourier Transform(DFT). In this process, we study the
properties and intricacies associated with the DFT.
A sinusoidal signal is a periodic function, that is, it repeats at
regular intervals of time. A sinusoid can be written in the form
y(t) = A sin(ωt + φ)
where ω is the angular frequency of the sinusoid, t is the time
at which we want to compute the value of the signal and φ is the
initial phase.
Problem 1(a):
Sampling: To find the samples of a sinusoid, I wrote a program
which takes the amplitude, angular frequency and one or more sam-
pling rates as command line arguments. Without loss of generality,
φ is assumed to be zero. To compute the samples of the signal in
the time domain, it is sufficient to find the argument for the sine
function. For the sample number i, the argument would be
argument =
ωi
samplingrate
This follows because in every second we need to take as many
samples as the sampling rate. The program first computes the ar-
gument for each sample. Then the program writes the time at which
the sample was taken along with the sample value to the file.
1Observations: When the sampling rate is very large compared
to the Nyquist rate, the samples obtained have the shape of the
envelope of the sinusoid.
Conclusions: The fact that a signal in the time domain can
be generated error-less when the sampling rate is greater than the
Nyquist rate is verified. However, if the sampling rate is close to the
Nyquist rate, the envelope does not seem very clear.
Frequency of sinusoids from zero crossing rate
The frequency is defined as the number of times a periodic signal
repeats in one second. A sinusoid has exactly two zero crossings in
one period. Therefore, we can compute the frequency of a sinusoid
from the number of zero crossings per second.
f =
Z
2
where f is the frequency of the sinusoid and Z is the number of zero
crossings per second. A zero crossing occurs when a given sample
2and its previous sample are opposite in sign. By maintaining a
counter, the number of zero crossings over the 1024 samples can
be calculated. The number of zero crossings per second can be
determined by knowing the time interval over which the samples
have been calculated.
T 0 = N
R
Z = N z
T 0
where T 0 is the time interval over which the signal spans, N is the
number of samples, R is the sampling rate and N z is the total num-
ber of zero crossings.
Error in calculating the frequency
There is a small error involved in calculating the frequency from the
number of zero crossings. This is because all the samples may not
cover an integral number of cycles of the sinusoid.
3Observations: The error in the frequency calculated by number
of zero crossings depends on how close the samples are to an inte-
gral multiple of cycles. Hence, the error will not show any pattern
over the sampling rate. However, if the sampling rate is made very
large, there will be no zero crossings over the sampled time interval.
In this case, the calculated frequency would be zero and the error
would be maximum.
Problem 1(b):
Magnitude spectrum of the Fourier Transform
The magnitude spectrum of the Fourier transform of the sinusoid
shows two impulses.
To calculate the frequency of the sinusoid from the Fourier spectrum,
we make use of the following facts:
If the signal is time limited for T 0 and sampled at intervals T s in
the time domain, then the samples in the DFT will be separated
by a frequency of f 0 and the peaks will be separated by f s in the
4frequency domain.
The relation between the parameters in the time domain and those
in the frequency domain is given by:
f 0 = 1
T 0
f s = 1
T s
So, to calculate the frequency of the signal in the time domain, we
find the difference in the frequencies of the peaks which gives us f s .
Then we divide this by the number of samples to get f 0 . From f 0 ,
we can calculate T 0 which gives the time bound in the time domain.
By knowing the number of zero crossings over this time interval, we
can calculate the frequency of the signal in the time domain.
Observations:
We find that the error is small for smaller values of sampling rate
and becomes a maximum for sampling rates which are large com-
pared to the Nyquist rate. The reason for this is similar to that
obtained from zero crossings in the time domain.
5Problem 2:
Addition of sampled signals
The Fourier transform of the sum of the sampled signal is verified
to be equal to the sum of the Fourier transforms of the individual
sampled signals. This verifies the superposition property of Fourier
transforms. However, as the peaks of the two Fourier transforms do
not coincide exactly, the magnitude of the peak in the sum is not
equal to the sum of the peaks in individual signals. We can observe
two different peaks in the sum signal. Each peak is contributed by
one signal.
67Convolution of sampled signals
The convolution of sampled signals in the time domain transforms
to the multiplication of the individual Fourier transforms in the
frequency domain. The convolution of the sampled signals is found
using the equation:
w[n] =
N −1
m=0
x[m]h[(n − m)% N]
To find the Fourier transform of the convolved signal, the size of the
Fast Fourier Transform(FFT) would be the sum of the sizes of the
individual sampled signals. Moreover, while finding the individual
Fourier transforms, the size of each sampled signal should be the
sum of the individual sizes. This is to avoid wrapping around of the
convolution.
8Results
The convolution of the signals in the time domain transforms to
multiplication of the individual Fourier transforms in the frequency
domain. However, as the peaks don’t coincide exactly in the indi-
vidual spectra we do not get the same Fourier transforms in the two
cases.
Two properties of DFT
Parseval’s Theorem:
The equation of Parseval’s theorem for a signal which is discrete in
both time and frequency domains is:
Results
The energy calculated from samples in the time domain and that
calculated from the samples in the frequency domain agreed to a
high precision.
9In case of signal 1 plotted above, the energy calculated in the time
domain was found to be 2042 while in frequency domain it was 2046.
In case of signal 2 plotted above, the energy calculated in the
time domain was found to be 8169.52 while in frequency domain it
was 8169.53.
Shifting Property:
Shifting a signal in the time domain is done as follows:
y[n] = x[(n − n 0 )% N]
Results
The magnitude spectrum of the shifted signal in the frequency
domain is same as that of the original signal. This verifies the shift-
ing property.
10References:
[1] Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems by B.P.Lathi, 3rd Edition.
[2] Wikipedia for properties of Discrete Fourier Transform
11
